Add first article for WebXR. (#1726)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/webxr-pt1/index.md

> ---

Author: I'm already working on part 2. Shouldn't we make the parts obvious in the URL?

> ---

Reviewer: We've already had a few problems with URL collisions on the site. If you want to make an argument that URL structures is important to a sizable number of our users, I'll be open to changing this in the future. But for now URL collisions is the bigger problem that must be prevented.

title: Virtual reality comes to the web

> subhead: A few basicis to prepare you for a spectrum of immersives experiences&#58; virtual reality, augmented reality, and everything in between.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subhead: A few basics to prepare you for a spectrum of immersive experiences&#58; virtual reality, augmented reality, and everything in between.
```

authors:
  - joemedley
date: 2019-10-30
hero: hero.jpg
alt: A person using a virtual reality headset.
description:
  Virtual reality has come to the web in Chrome 79. Based on the WebXR Device
  API, this launch is the foundation for immersive features to come later such
  as augmented reality. Other browsers will be supporting the spec soon,

>   including [update before launch].

Author: We know. We have a similar line in the beta post. Some of the other players are literally changing their minds from hour to hour.

>   including [update before launch].

Author: Updated.

tags:
  - post
  - ar
  - augmented-reality
  - virtual-reality

>   - vr

Author: In a book index, which shares underlying theory with tags, one of these would have 'see the other` instead of a page number. Synonyms are a must for indexes and tags because it's a way to account for a reader having a different term in their head than what's used in the article. 

Speaking of that, We really wouldn't be following the principle correctly if we didn't implement the web's version of a 'see' reference. Would you like me to open a feature request for tag redirects?

>   - vr

Reviewer: I just created #1808 for the tag redirect feature request. I will support tag synonyms once we have the tag redirect infrastructure in place. Once that feature is implemented you can add synonyms wherever you like. If we're start using synonyms now, without a redirect infrastructure, we introduce the possibility of half our content being tagged `virtual-reality` and the other half being tagged `vr`. The content review process is already lengthy when you follow the content checklist, so I'm hesitant to add yet another manual check right now. Furthermore not everyone is following the content checklist rigorously, so there is a very real possibility that some reviewers will forget to check if all relevant tags have been applied to an article.

  - webxr
---

Immersive experiences have come to the web in Chrome 79. The WebXR Device API
brings virtual reality (with augmented reality to come later). While an update
to the GamePad API extends the advanced use of controlls to VRß. Other browsers
will be supporting these specs soon, including [update before launch].

This article begins a series on the immersive web. This installment covers
setting up a basic WebXR application and constructing a frame loop, the
workhorse of an immersive experience. Later articles will cover drawing to a
screen and interacting with input devices using [Gamepad API
updates](https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5659025263820800) mentioned
above. Though Chrome only supports virtual reality for now, everything I cover

> in this and succeeding articles applies equally to both AR and VR.

Author: See lines 49 through 50.

> in this and succeeding articles applies equally to both AR and VR.

Reviewer: Perfect, thanks.

If you've followed the progress of immersive experiences on the web, you know
there has been much experimentation in recent years. An early WebVR
implementation, released in 2017 in Firefox and in 2018 in Chrome behind a flag,
proved inadequate for [various
reasons](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2018/05/welcome-to-immersive#what_happened_to_webvr_11).
The work to correct its shortcomings blossomed last year into the [WebXR Device
API](https://www.w3.org/TR/webxr/). It was in an origin trial for a while, and
now we're enabling by default.

## What is the immersive web?

Though we use two terms to describe immersive experiences&mdash;augmented reality and virtual reality&mdash;many think of them on a spectrum from complete reality to completely virtual, with degrees of immersion in between.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--center">

>   <img src="./immersive-spectrum.png" style="max-width: 100%;"/>

Author: Done.

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    The spectrum of immersive experiences
  </figcaption>
</figure

Examples of immersive experiences include:

* Games
* 360° videos
* Traditional 2D (or 3D) videos presented in immersive surroundings
* Home buying
* Viewing products in your home before you buy them
* Immersive art
* Something cool nobody's thought of yet

## Concepts and usage

I'll explain a few basics of using the WebXR Device API. If you need more depth
than I've provided, check out the Immersive Web Working Group's [WebXR

> samples](https://immersive-web.github.io/webxr-samples/) or [MDN's burgeoning

Author: What's wrong with burgeoning?

> samples](https://immersive-web.github.io/webxr-samples/) or [MDN's burgeoning

Reviewer: `burgeoning` seems more like a more complex synonym of `growing`. The usual readability argument applies here: we have an international audience, many of whom might speak English as a second language, so we should be hyper-vigilant about using the simplest words possible at all times. You can ignore this suggestion if you feel strongly about it.

request anything sensitive from the viewer. Web pages or apps must be served
over HTTPS. The API itself is designed to protect information obtained from
sensors and cameras, which it needs in order to function.

### Requesting a session

Entering an XR session requires a user gesture. To get that, use feature
detection and make a call to `isSessionSupported()`. In the example below, I've
indicated that I want a virtual reality session with the `'immersive-vr'`
session type. [Other session
types](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XR/isSessionSupported#Syntax)
are defined in the spec and will be available in future versions of Chrome. Once
I know that virtual reality sessions are supported, I enable a button that lets
me acquire a user gesture.

```js
if (navigator.xr) {
  const supported = await navigator.xr.isSessionSupported('immersive-vr');
  if (supported) {
    xrButton.addEventListener('click', onButtonClicked);
    xrButton.innerHTML = 'Enter VR';
    xrButton.disabled = false;
  }
}
```

After enabling the button, I wait for a click event then request a session.

```js
function onButtonClicked() {

>   if (!xrSession) {

Reviewer: Great

  .then((refSpace) => {
    xrRefSpace = refSpace;
    xrSession.requestAnimationFrame(onXRFrame);
  });
}
```

After getting a reference space, I call `XRSession.requestAnimationFrame()`.
This is the start of presenting virtual content, which is done in the frame
loop.

### Running a frame loop

The frame loop is a user-agent controlled infinite loop in which content is
repeatedly drawn to the screen. Content is drawn in discrete blocks called
frames. The succession of frames creates the illusion of movement. The number of
frames per second currently varies between devices, and may be anything from 60
to 144, but that has no bearing on your code.

The basic process for the frame loop is:

<ol>
  <li>Call <code>XRSession.requestAnimationFrame()</code>. In response, the user agent invokes the <code>XRFrameRequestCallback</code>, which is defined by you.</li>
  <li>Inside your callback function:
    <ol>
      <li>Call <code>XRSession.requestAnimationFrame()</code> again.</li>
      <li>Query for the position (called a pose in WebXR) of the viewer.</li>
      <li>Draw content from the viewer's point of view.</li>
      <li>Process user input.</li>
    </ol>
  </li>

> </ol>

Reviewer: I think Markdown can handle a list like this. If this doesn't work:

```
1. A
1. B
   1. C
   1. D
1. E
```

Then I'm pretty sure this will work:

```
1. A
1. B
     1. C
     1. D
1. E
```

(Only difference being that C and D are indented 2 more spaces)

Author: I tried it. It didn't work.

Reviewer: Good to know. Thanks.

### End the session

An immersive session may end for several reasons including ending by your own
code through a call to `XRSession.end()`. Other causes include the headset being
disconnected or another application taking control of it. This is why a
well-behaved application should monitor the `end` event. When it occurs, discard
the session and its related render objects. An ended immersive session cannot be
resumed. To reenter the immersive experience, my app needs to start a new
session.

Recall from [Entering a session](#entering-a-session) that during setup, I added
an `onend` event handler.

```js
function onSessionStarted(xrSession) {
  xrSession.addEVentListener('end', onSessionEnded);
  // More setup…
}
```

Inside the event handler, restore the state of the app before the user entered a
session.

```js
function onSessionEnded(event) {
  xrSession = null;
  xrButton.innerHTML = 'Enter VR';
}
```

## Conclusion

Now that I've shown you how the frame loop works, you should have enough to at
least make sense of sample code. Hopefully that's enough to start experimenting.
In the next article, I'll cover a bit about WebGL and how it interacts with
certain WebXR interfaces.

> Photo by [JESHOOTS.COM](https://unsplash.com/@jeshoots?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)

Author: Rob asked me to put one in on a previous article.
